0
0
0
2

l
u
J

8
2

1
v
0
7
0
7
0
0
0
/
h
t
-
l
c
u
n
:
v
i
X
r
a

Prediction of nuclear reaction rates for astrophysics

Thomas Rauscher

Departement f¨ur Physik und Astronomie, Universit¨at Basel,
Klingelbergstr. 82, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland

The investigation of explosive nuclear burning in astrophysical environments is a chal-
lenge for both theoretical and experimental nuclear physicists. Highly unstable nuclei are
produced in such processes which again can be targets for subsequent reactions. The major-
ity of reactions can be described in the framework of the statistical model (compound nucleus
mechanism, Hauser–Feshbach approach), provided that the level density of the compound
nucleus is suﬃciently large in the contributing energy window [1]. Among the nuclear proper-
ties needed in this treatment are masses, optical potentials, level densities, resonance energies
and widths of the GDR. All these necessary ingredients have to be provided in as reliable a
way as possible, also for nuclei where no such information is available experimentally.

A recent experiment [2] has underlined that the low-energy extrapolation of the widely
used optical α+nucleus potentials may still have to be improved. Currently, there are only
few global parametrizations for optical α+nucleus potentials at astrophysical energies. Most
global potentials are of the Saxon–Woods form, parametrized at energies above about 70
MeV, e.g. [3]. The high Coloumb barrier makes a direct experimental approach very diﬃcult
at low energies. More recently, there were attempts to extend those parametrizations to
energies below 70 MeV [4]. Early astrophysical statistical model calculations [5, 6] made use
of simpliﬁed equivalent square well potentials and the black nucleus approximation. Improved
calculations [7] employed a phenomenological Woods–Saxon potential [8], based on extensive
data [9]. However, it was not clear how well all these potentials would work for heavy targets
with A > 60 or in the thermonuclear energy range.

Most recent experimental investigations [10, 11] found a systematic mass– and energy–
dependence of the optical potentials and were very successful in describing experimental
scattering data, as well as bound and quasi–bound states and B(E2) values, with folding
potentials. Based on that work, a global parametrization of the volume integrals can be
found [12]. In this description, the real part of the nuclear potential is given by a folding
potential Vf (r, E). The imaginary part W (r, E) is of Woods–Saxon shape with a strongly
energy–dependent depth. Nuclear structure and deformation information determines the
shape of the energy–dependence by including level density dependent terms [12].

It is easy to show that the ﬁnal transmission coeﬃcients are not only sensitive to the
strength of the potential but also to its geometry. Experimental data seemed to indicate
that the geometry may also be energy–dependent [4, 13]. At low energies, the diﬀuseness
of the standard volume Woods–Saxon potential had to be set to smaller values, while the
radius parameter was increased, in order to be able to describe experimental scattering data.
This can be understood in terms of the semi–classical theory of elastic scattering [14] which
shows that the relative importance of contributions from diﬀerent radial parts of the potential
depends on the energy. It was shown [15] that the predicted enhanced surface absorption at
low energies can be described by an increased surface Woods–Saxon term. Thus, the artiﬁcial
change in geometry in the description of scattering data results from the use of a volume term
only. Consequently, the optical potential proposed here contains an imaginary part which is

given by the sum of a volume Woods–Saxon term and a surface term:

V (r, E) = VC(r) + Vf (r, E) + i

Wv(E)f (r, R, a) − Ws(E)

(cid:18)

d
dr

f (r, R, a)

(cid:19)

2

(1)

with

f (r, R, a) =

1 + e
h

−1

r−R
a

i

, Wv(E) = C − αe−βE , Ws(E) = D + γe−δE .

(2)

The depths of the potentials are exponentially dependent on the energy, with the volume
depth Wv increasing and the surface depth Ws decreasing when going to higher energies.
An increasingly dominant surface term at low energies leads to similar eﬀects as reducing
the diﬀuseness of a pure volume Woods–Saxon potential. The coeﬃcients are related to
the height of the Coulomb barrier and the microscopic and deformation corrections as used
in Ref. [12]. The total volume integral is still given by the relation derived in Ref. [12].
The energy–dependence of the 144Sm(α,γ)148Gd excitation curve [2] at low energies can be
reproduced by such a description. Nevertheless, more experimental data is needed which
should be consistently analyzed at diﬀerent energies with optical potential parametrizations
similar to the one used in Ref. [15].

Based on the well–known code SMOKER [7], an improved code for the prediction of
astrophysical cross sections and reaction rates in the statistical model has been developed [16].
Among other changes, it includes an improved level density description [1], updated data sets
of experimental level information, as well as the new α+nucleus potential. It also allows to
treat isospin eﬀects which are especially important in α capture reactions on self–conjugate
target nuclei and in proton capture reactions above the neutron separation energy. For a
more detailed presentation of the code and possible isospin eﬀects, see [16].

Acknowledgements

TR is an APART fellow of the Austrian Academy of Sciences.

References

[1] T. Rauscher, F.-K. Thielemann, and K.-L. Kratz, Phys. Rev. C 56 (1997) 1613.

[2] E. Somorjai, Zs. F¨ul¨op, ´A.Z. Kiss, C.E. Rolfs, H.P. Trautvetter, U. Greife, M. Junker,
S. Goriely, M. Arnould, M. Rayet, T. Rauscher, and H. Oberhummer, A&A 333 (1998)
1112

[3] M. Nolte, H. Machner and J. Bojowald, Phys. Rev. C 36 (1987) 1312.

[4] V. Avrigeanu, P.E. Hodgson, M. Avrigeanu, Phys. Rev. C 49 (1994) 2136.

[5] M. Arnould, A&A 19 (1972) 92.

[6] S.E. Woosley, W.A. Fowler, J.A. Holmes, and B.A. Zimmerman, At. Data Nucl. Data

Tables 22 (1978) 371.

[7] F.-K. Thielemann, M. Arnould and J.W. Truran, in Advances in Nuclear Astrophysics,

ed. E. Vangioni–Flam, Gif sur Yvette 1987, Editions Fronti`ere, p. 525.

3

[8] F.M. Mann, 1978, Hanford Engineering, report HEDL-TME 78–83.

[9] L. McFadden and G.R. Satchler, Nucl. Phys. 84 (1966) 177.

[10] P. Mohr, H. Abele, U. Atzrott, G. Staudt, R. Bieber, K. Gr¨un, H. Oberhummer, T.
Rauscher, and E. Somorjai, in Proc. Europ. Workshop on Heavy Element Nucleosynthesis,
eds. E. Somorjai and Zs. F¨ul¨op, Institute of Nuclear Research, Debrecen 1994, p. 176.

[11] U. Atzrott, P. Mohr, H. Abele, C. Hillenmayer, and G. Staudt, Phys. Rev. C 53 (1996)

1336.

[12] T. Rauscher, in Nuclear Astrophysics, Proc. Int. Workshop XXVI on Gross Properties
of Nuclei and Nuclear Excitations, eds. M. Buballa et al., GSI, Darmstadt 1998, p. 288.

[13] P. Mohr, T. Rauscher, H. Oberhummer, Z. M´at´e, Zs. F¨ul¨op, E. Somorjai, M. Jaeger, and

G. Staudt, Phys. Rev. C 55 (1997) 1523.

[14] D.M. Brink and N. Takigawa, Nucl. Phys. A279 (1977) 159.

[15] A. Budzanowski et al., Phys. Rev. C 17 (1978) 951.

[16] T. Rauscher and F.-K. Thielemann, in Proc. 2nd Oak Ridge Symp. on Atomic and Nu-

clear Astrophysics, ed. A. Mezzacappa, IOP Publishing, in press;
preprint nucl-th/9802040.

